DCI™ PENALTY GUIDE AND PROCEDURES Release September 1, 2007 Effective September 20, 2007 INTRODUCTION The DCI Penalty Guide provides judges the appropriate penalties and procedures to handle offenses that occur during the course of a tournament, as well as the underlying philosophy that guides their implementation. It exists to protect players from potential misconduct and to protect the integrity of the tournament itself. A violation of rules requires some penalty or they are unenforceable.

FRAMEWORK OF THIS DOCUMENT This document is divided into four major parts: General Definitions and Philosophy (sections 1-99), Universal Infractions

(sections 100-199), Card Game-Specific Infractions (sections 200-299), and Miniatures Game-Specific Infractions (sections 300-399). Infractions are broken down into general classes (such as Game Play Error, Unsporting Conduct, and Cheating),

and further into subclasses for specific infractions. While many infractions could fall into a more general subclass, they are separate because:

•

•

•

•

The DCI can identify the potential for significant advantage (such as Drawing Extra Cards).

The procedure to correct the infraction deviates from the base philosophy for the class of infractions (such as Looking at Extra Cards).

The DCI wishes to specifically track a player’s repeated infractions across multiple tournaments (such as Marked Cards — Pattern).

The DCI wishes to make it clearer if a penalty should be upgraded or not if it is repeated (such as Marked Cards —

No Pattern).

See Appendix B of the DCI Universal Tournament Rules for further definitions of terms in this document.

This document is published in multiple languages. If a discrepancy exists between the English version and a non-English version of this document, tournament participants must refer to the English version to settle disputes concerning interpretations of the Penalty Guide.

This document is updated periodically. Please obtain the most current version at http://www.thedci.com/docs.

CONTENTS General Philosophy Definition of Rules Enforcement Level (REL)

Definition of Penalties Applying Penalties Repeat Offenses Player Communication Shortcuts Universal Infractions Deck/Warband Errors Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Decklist Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Deck (Legal Decklist)

Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Deck (No Decklists)

Deck/Warband Error — Improper Registration of Limited Card Pool Deck/Warband Error — Failure to Desideboard Deck/Warband Error — Lost Miniature Game Play Errors Game Play Error — Incorrect Representation Game Play Error — Illegal Game State Game Play Error — Missed Trigger Game Play Error — Failure to Reveal Game Play Error — Game Rule Violation Game Play Error — Failure to Maintain Game State Tournament Errors Tournament Error — Tardiness Tournament Error — Playing the Wrong Opponent Tournament Error — Slow Play Tournament Error — Insufficient Randomization Tournament Error — Failure to Follow Official Announcements Tournament Error — Draft Procedure Violation Tournament Error — Player Communication Violation Unsporting Conduct Unsporting Conduct — Minor Unsporting Conduct — Major Unsporting Conduct — Randomly Determining a Winner Unsporting Conduct — Bribery and Wagering Unsporting Conduct — Aggressive Behavior Unsporting Conduct — Theft of Tournament Material Cheating Cheating — Stalling Cheating — Fraud Cheating — Outside Assistance Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials Card Game-Specific Infractions Card Drawing Card Drawing — Looking at Extra Cards Card Drawing — Drawing Extra Cards Card Drawing — Improper Drawing at Start of Game Card Drawing — Failure to Discard Marked Cards Marked Cards — No Pattern Marked Cards — Pattern Miniatures Game-Specific Infractions Dice Errors Dice Error — Too Few Rolled Dice Error — Too Many Rolled Appendix A — Penalty Quick Reference Appendix B — Changes from Previous Version Appendix C — Using Reporter V2.X with these guidelines Appendix D — Rule Enforcement Levels of Premiere Programs PAGE GENERAL PHILOSOPHY Judges at tournaments are to be neutral arbiters and enforcers of policy and rules. Judges should not intervene in games unless a rules violation occurs, they believe a rules violation may have occurred, a player has a concern or question, or to prevent a situation from escalating. Judges do not stop play errors from occurring, but deal with rules issues, penalize those who violate rules or policy, and promote fair play and sporting conduct by example and diplomacy.

All players are treated equally according to the guidelines of an event's Rules Enforcement Level (REL). Knowledge of a player's history does not influence the recognition of an infraction or the application of penalties, though it may affect the manner of an investigation. The REL of an event defines what is expected from a player regarding their rules and policy knowledge and technical play skill.

Treating a player differently because they once played in a Professional event would mean holding each player to a different standard and would produce inconsistent rulings that depended on the judge’s familiarity with the player.

Professionals should be able to play in Regular REL events without being held to a higher technical level of play against less-experienced opponents who may not be as familiar with the rules.

The purpose of a penalty is to educate the player not to make similar mistakes in the future. This is done through both an explanation of where the rules or policies were violated and a penalty to reinforce the education. Penalties are also for the deterrence and education of every other player in the event. A penalty should not be deviated from for the purpose of education or because a player did not realize that what they were doing was incorrect. Infractions are also used to track player behavior over time.

The level of penalty an infraction carries is based on these factors:

•

•

•

•

The amount of disruption it causes (time and people affected) in discovering, investigating, and resolving the issue.

The potential for abuse (or risk of being exposed).

The Rules Enforcement Level of the tournament.

Repeated offenses by the player within the tournament.

Only the Head Judge is authorized to issue penalties that deviate from these guidelines. The Head Judge should not deviate from this guide’s procedures except in significant and exceptional circumstances. Significant and exceptional circumstances are rare — a table collapses, a booster contains miniatures from a different set — or a situation that has no applicable philosophy for guidance. The Rules Enforcement Level, round of the tournament,

age or experience-level of the player, desire to educate the player, and certification level of the judge are NOT exceptional circumstances. If another judge feels deviation is appropriate, he or she should consult with the Head Judge.

Judges should be seen as a benefit to the players, helping to ensure the consistent and fair running of a tournament.

Players should be encouraged to use judges as needed, and should not be afraid to call a judge if they feel one is required. If a player commits an offense, realizes it and calls a judge over immediately and before they could potentially benefit from the offense, the Head Judge has the option to downgrade the penalty without it being considered a deviation, though they should still follow any procedure recommended to fix the error. For example, a player offers his deck to his opponent and while cutting his opponent’s deck discovers that a card that should be in his deck is in a previously removed from game pile. If he calls the judge over immediately, the Head Judge may choose to issue a Warning rather than a Game Loss.

All infractions in this document (with the exception of the Cheating and Unsporting Conduct sections) presume the offense is unintentional. If a judge believes an offense was intentional, the infraction should be Cheating or Unsporting Conduct DEFINITION OF RULES ENFORCEMENT LEVEL (REL)

Rules Enforcement Level is a means to communicate to the players and judges what expectations they can have of the event in terms of rigid rules enforcement, technically correct play, and procedures used.

The REL of an event should increase based on the prizes awarded and the distance a player may be expected to travel. People who travel further are often more competitive and are likely to desire correctness over fun. The REL of the event should reflect this.

The penalties in this guide already take into account the REL of the event and as such judges should not deviate from this guide based on a perceived “lower REL”.

Regular Regular events are focused on fun and social aspects, not enforcement. Most tournaments are run at this level unless they offer sizeable prizes or invitations. Some Junior tournaments may also be run at this level even if they do offer sizeable prizes or invitations. Players are expected to know most of the game rules, may have heard of policy and what is "really bad", but generally play in a fashion similar to the way they do at home. Players are still responsible for following the rules, but the penalties tend to be less severe.

•

•

These events do not require deck verification.

These events do not require certified judges.

Competitive Competitive events are those with significant cash prizes, pro points, and/or invitations awarded to Professional events. Players are expected to know the game’s rules – but not to a technically detailed level – and be familiar with the policies and procedures, but unintentional errors are not punished severely. These are events that protect the interests of all players by providing event integrity while also recognizing that not all players are intimately familiar with Professional-level event structure, proper procedures, and rules.

•

•

•

These events use a certified judge and almost always use deck verification procedures.

The highest-level certified judge available should be on staff.

These events may require a few staff or judges in support.

Professional Professional level events offer large cash awards, prestige, and other benefits that draw players from great distances.

These events hold players to a higher standard of behavior and technically correct play than Competitive events.

Offenses will often receive a harsher penalty, even for minor errors.

•

•

•

These events use a certified judge and use deck verification procedures.

The highest-level certified judge available should be on staff.

These events will use several certified judges in support.

DEFINITION OF PENALTIES Caution A Caution is a verbal admonition to a player. This is the lightest penalty that can be given. Cautions are used in situations of minor incorrect play or disruption where a quick word can easily correct the behavior or situation. It is also used for common mistakes in Regular events where the potential for advantage is low. No extra time should be required for a Caution, as any Caution that takes more than a few moments to resolve should be upgraded to a Warning. A Caution should be noted for the duration of the tournament in case of repeated offense, but does not need to be reported to the DCI.

The word “caution” does not need to be used in issuing this penalty. Any verbal admonition to a player, even if it is not made clear to the player that an official Caution has been issued, should be considered a Caution for purposes of upgrading repeated infractions.

Warning A Warning is an officially tracked penalty. Warnings are used in situations of incorrect play when a small amount of time is needed to implement the corrective procedure. The purpose of a Warning is to alert judges and players involved that a problem has occurred and to keep a permanent record of the infraction in the DCI Penalty Database.

A time extension should be issued if the ruling has taken more than a minute.

Game Loss A Game Loss is issued in situations where the procedure to correct the offense takes a significant amount of time that may slow the entire tournament, causes significant disruption to the tournament, or renders the game impossible to continue due to physical damage. It is also used for some infractions that have a higher probability for a player to gain advantage.

A Game Loss ends the current game immediately and the player who committed the infraction is considered to have lost the game for the purpose of match reporting. The player receiving a Game Loss chooses whether to play or draw, if applicable, in the next game of that match. If a Game Loss is issued before the match begins, neither player in that match may use sideboards (if the tournament uses them) for the first game they play.

Game Losses should be applied to the game in which the offense occurred unless the players have begun a new game or the tournament is between rounds, in which case the loss should be applied to the player's next game. If a player receives a Game Loss at the same time their opponent receives a Match Loss, the Game Loss should be carried over into the next round. Simultaneous Game Loss penalties should not be deferred just because their application would give one player the match win. It is also acceptable for simultaneous Game Loss penalties to extend a match past the expected number of games if neither player has won a majority. Players will still receive a Game Loss if they drop from the tournament.

Some tournaments feature one-game matches, which make a Game Loss equivalent to a Match Loss. In Swiss rounds, unless otherwise specified (such as Tournament Error — Tardiness), apply a Match Point penalty for the first offense instead, and follow any instructions to continue the game.

Match Point A Match Point penalty is a one-point loss assessed against a player’s total match points for the tournament. They are used to replace a Game Loss in matches during Swiss rounds that consist of a single game. Match Point penalties should never be used except as detailed in this guide and never for repeated offenses. Judges should never deviate from the Penalty Guide to assign a Match Point penalty. Doing so may result in a DCI investigation of the official.

In instances where a Match Point penalty is called for, but the game cannot be continued for physical reasons, issue a Game Loss penalty instead.

Match Point penalties require use of DCI Reporter 3.0 or greater. When this penalty is applied, DCI Reporter will place an (*) next to the player’s name. Events not using DCI Reporter 3.0 or greater should issue a Game Loss penalty instead.

Match Loss A Match Loss is a severe penalty that is usually the result of repeated offenses.

Match Losses should be applied to the match in which the offense occurred unless the tournament is in a new round,

in which case the penalty should be applied in the current round. Players will still be issued a Match Loss penalty if they drop from the tournament, though they won’t be paired for the next round.

Disqualification A Disqualification is issued for activity that damages the integrity of a tournament as a whole or for severe unsporting conduct. It may also be applied when a player is unable to continue in a tournament (due to losing portions of their deck, for example) but refuses to drop from the tournament.

The recipient of a Disqualification does not need to be a player in the tournament. He or she may be a spectator or other bystander. If this happens, they should be entered into the tournament in DCI Reporter so that they may be disqualified and reported to the DCI.

Disqualification can occur without proof of action so long as the Head Judge determines sufficient information exists to believe the tournament’s integrity may have been compromised. It is recommended that the Head Judge’s report to the DCI reflect this fact.

When this penalty is applied, the player loses his or her current match and is dropped from the tournament. Players will still receive whatever prizes they had earned before the disqualification unless they were disqualified without prize. A player disqualified without prize receives no prize and no awards (such as pro points, event invitations,

etc.). If a player has already received prizes at the time they are disqualified without prize, that player may keep whatever prizes he or she has received but does not receive any additional prizes or awards they may be due. For Competitive and Professional events the Head Judge must report all Disqualifications without prize to the DCI Investigations Manager. At Regular events only Unsporting Conduct disqualifications must be reported to the DCI Investigations Manager, though the disqualification should be entered into DCI Reporter as usual.

When a player is disqualified without prize during a tournament, they are removed from the tournament and do not take up a place in the standings. This means that all players in the tournament will advance one spot in the standings and are entitled to any prizes the new standing would offer. If the Disqualification without prize takes place after a cut is made, no additional players advance in place of the disqualified player although they do move up a spot in the standings. For example, if a player is disqualified without prize during the quarterfinal round of a Pro Tour Qualifier, the former 9th place finisher does not advance into the single elimination top 8, but they do move into 8th place in the standings.

Reports for the DCI Investigations Manager should be submitted via the Judge Center: http://judge.wizards.com.

APPLYING PENALTIES The DCI Penalty Guide applies to every game the DCI sanctions, but certain infractions may not apply to certain games. For example, games that do not have a mulligan rule will not use mulligan-related penalties.

Any penalty higher than a Caution should be reported with the tournament report so that a permanent record can be kept in the DCI Penalty Database. Additionally, any penalty of Game Loss or higher should be reported to the Head Judge, and it is recommended that only the Head Judge issue penalties of this nature (with the exception of Tardiness and Deck/Warband Errors).

Any time a penalty is issued, the judge must explain to the players involved the infraction, the procedure for fixing the situation, and the penalty. If the Head Judge chooses to deviate from the Penalty Guide, the Head Judge should explain the standard penalty and the reason for deviation. Penalties should always be applied during the round in which they occurred unless the penalty specifies otherwise.

Some penalties feature additional procedures to handle the offense beyond the base penalty. These procedures exist to protect officials from accusations of unfairness, bias, or favoritism. If a judge makes a ruling that is consistent with quoted text, then the complaints of a player shift from accusation of unfairness against the judge to accusations of unfairness against the DCI. Deviations from these procedures may raise accusations against the judge from the player(s) involved, or from those who hear about it.

These procedures do not, and should not, take into account the game being played, the current situation that the game is in, or who will benefit strategically from the procedure associated with a penalty. While it is tempting to try to “fix” game situations, the danger of missing a subtle detail or showing favoritism to a player (even unintentionally) makes it a bad idea.

If a procedure notes a variation is used for “single-game matches” this refers to matches consisting of one game,

regardless of the game being played. For example, Dreamblade matches nearly always consist of one game to a match, but the Dreamblade Championship finals could be run as three games to a match. Then, the variation for

“single-game matches” should not be used, even though the rest of the rounds may have utilized it.

Separate infractions committed or discovered at the same time should be treated as separate penalties, though if the root cause is the same, only the more severe one should be applied. If the first penalty would cause the second one to be inapplicable for the round (such as a Game Loss issued along with a Match Loss), the more severe penalty should be issued first, followed by the lesser penalty in the next round.

Some violations of tournament rules will not meet the criteria for any specific infraction. Many minor offenses that a player can commit are not covered by a specific infraction should be handled initially with a Caution. If repeated,

directly instruct the player not to repeat the offense, and handle further offenses as Unsporting Conduct — Major for failing to follow the direct instruction of a tournament official.

REPEAT OFFENSES The recommended penalty for the first offense is listed in the "Penalty" portion of each infraction. At Competitive and Professional RELs, unless suggested otherwise in the penalty procedure, the next highest penalty is normally awarded for the second offense of the same infraction during the tournament. Penalties at Regular events may be upgraded at the Head Judge’s discretion. Penalties continue to be upgraded with further offenses and are upgraded in the following order:

Caution — Warning — Game Loss — Match Loss — Disqualification with prize A Match Point penalty is never used for repeat offenses. If a Match Point penalty is issued and the offense is repeated, it should be upgraded to a Match Loss.

Disqualifications that are the result of accumulated offenses are with prize. Disqualifications with prize do not require a DQ report to be submitted to the DCI Investigations Manager.

PLAYER COMMUNICATION Communication between players is essential to the successful play of any game that involves virtual objects or hidden information. While bluffing may be an aspect of games, there need to be clear lines as to what is, and is not,

acceptable for players to say or otherwise represent. Officials and highly competitive players should understand the line between bluffing and fraud. This will confirm expectations of both sporting and competitive players during a game.

The philosophy of the DCI is that a player should have an advantage due to better understanding of the rules of a game, greater awareness of the interactions in the current game state and superior tactical planning. Players are under no obligation to assist their opponents in playing the game, but may not withhold information about physically unrepresented data that would prevent their opponents from deriving their own view of the game state.

Regardless of anything else, players are expected to treat their opponents politely and with respect. Failure to do so may lead to Unsporting Conduct penalties.

The Golden Rule of Player Communication: Statements made about the game being played must be truthful (to the best of their knowledge). However, statements do not need to be exhaustive – honest answers with careful omissions or “non-answers” designed to misdirect opponents into making suboptimal – but not illegal – plays are acceptable.

The following areas are exceptions to the Golden Rule:

•

Statements about hidden information do not need to be true in any way. Bluffs involving the content of that hidden information are an integral part of the game.

•

Statements about a future game state or future action are not required to be true. Whether this statement could be true in the future is irrelevant.

•

Players are responsible for ensuring that the physical state of the game (tapped status, flipped status, the zone an object is in) is clear at all times.

•

If a player asks their opponent a question, the opponent usually can decline to answer. If they do choose to answer, then they are expected to adhere to the Golden Rule.

•

Players must answer completely and honestly specific questions about past game actions taken since the active player's previous turn.

•

Players must answer completely and honestly specific questions about the game state that cannot be derived from physical representations and/or game actions taken since the active player’s previous turn.

•

If a player does not wish to ask their opponent a question or does not believe they have received the information that they need, they are encouraged to call a judge. Players may not decline to answer questions asked of them by a judge (and their answers must be truthful and complete), but they may ask to answer away from the table.

•

Players are responsible for being aware of the game state. Judges will not generally assist the player in determining the current game state but can answer questions about the rules, interactions between cards, or the Oracle texts of relevant cards. At Regular REL, the judge may assist the players in understanding the game state in the interest of education.

•

Players may not use misleading statements to trick their opponent into making illegal plays. Players may not misrepresent to the opponent that an illegal play has occurred.

Shortcuts A shortcut is an action taken by players to skip parts of the technical play sequence without explicitly announcing them. Shortcuts are essential for the smooth play of a game, as they allow players to play in a clear fashion without getting bogged down in the minutia of the rules. Most shortcuts involve skipping one or more priority passes to the mutual understanding of all players; if a player wishes to demonstrate or use a new shortcut entailing any number of priority passes, they must be clear where the game state will end up as part of the request.

A player may interrupt a shortcut by explaining how they are deviating from it or at which point in the middle they wish to take an action. If the players are confused by the use of a shortcut, they should be backed up to the beginning of the shortcut and no penalty should be issued (though they should be reminded to play more clearly). A player is not allowed to use a previously undeclared shortcut, or to modify an in-use shortcut without announcing the modification, in order to create ambiguity in the game.

A player may not request priority and take no action with it. If they decide they do not wish to do anything, the request is nullified and priority is returned to the player that originally had it.

Certain conventional shortcuts used in Magic are detailed below. If a player wishes to deviate from these, they should be explicit about doing so. Note that some of these are exceptions to the policy above in that they do cause non-explicit priority passes.

•

The statement "Go" (and equivalents such as "Your turn" and "Done") moves the turn to that player's end step and passes priority to the non-active player. Opponents are assumed to be taking actions at that point unless they specify otherwise.

•

A statement such as "I'm ready for combat" or "Declare attackers?" moves the turn into the Beginning of Combat Step and passes priority to the non-active player. They are assumed to be acting then unless they specify otherwise.

•

Whenever a player adds an object to the stack, they are assumed to be passing priority unless they explicitly announce that they intend to retain it. If they add a group of objects to the stack without explicitly retaining priority and a player wishes to take an action at a point in the middle, the actions should be reversed up to that point.

•

"No attacks" or similar statements during combat are an indication that the active player has passed priority in the end of combat step.

•

If a player announces an X spell without specifying the value of X, it is assumed to be for all mana currently available in their pool.

•

Players are assumed to have paid any cost of 0 unless they announce otherwise.

•

A player is assumed to have assigned all trample damage possible to the defending player unless stated otherwise.

•

A spell or ability that targets an object on the stack is assumed by default to target the legal target closest to the top of the stack.

•

The head to which damage is being assigned in Two-Headed Giant is undefined by default. If it is relevant,

it is up to the team that knows it may be relevant to ask for clarification or to propose an alternate shortcut.

UNIVERSAL INFRACTIONS These are errors that apply to all games, though individual infractions may not be relevant to a particular game or tournament setup.

DECK/WARBAND ERRORS This section deals with problems related to errors in the registration or contents of the card pool, deck, or warband at a tournament. Though these rules may refer to ‘decks,’ ‘cards’ and ‘decklists’ they also apply to the equivalents for games using items other than cards.

At all RELs, judges and other tournament officials should be vigilant about reminding players before the tournament begins of the consequences of submitting an illegal list, or playing with an illegal deck.

In single-game matches, if the error is discovered during a deck check or before play begins and would result in a Game Loss penalty, instead issue a Match Point penalty, fix the deck to match the decklist and allow the player to play the game.

Sideboards are considered to be part of a player’s deck for the purposes of these infractions. If a player has lost some of their sideboard and notifies a judge immediately, no penalty should be issued. Make note of the missing cards. If the player finds them (or copies of the same card) at a later point, they may add them back to their sideboard after notifying the Head Judge.

Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Decklist Definition Players are considered to have illegal decklists when one or more of the following conditions are true:

•

•

•

•

The decklist contains an illegal number of cards for the format.

The decklist contains cards that are illegal for the format.

A card listed on a decklist is not identified by its full proper name, and could be more than one card.

The decklist contains cards that would make the deck illegal because it would violate a game rule (such as the four card limit rule in Magic® games or the three miniature limit for Dreamblade® games).

This infraction applies to tournaments for which decklists are being used and includes any sideboard errors.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament has 59 cards listed on her decklist when the minimum is 60.

A player in an Extended Magic tournament lists Skullclamp (a banned card) on his decklist.

A player in a Magic tournament has a 56-card decklist. His actual deck contains 60 cards, with four Psychatogs not listed.

A player in a Limited Dreamblade tournament has listed 17 miniatures on the warband list when the maximum warband size is 16.

A player in a Magic tournament has four copies of Terror in his main deck and two in his sideboard.

A player in a Limited Magic tournament fails to list any of her sideboard cards in the "Total" column of her decklist.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament lists four copies of Cannibal Pariah.

A player in a Magic tournament lists 'Ar.Wurm' which could be either Argothian Wurm or Arrogant Wurm A player in a Magic tournament lists ‘COP’ instead of ‘Circle of Protection: Red’

Philosophy If the decklist is illegal, the player is considered to have an illegal deck, regardless of the physical contents of his or her deck. However, because the majority of illegal decklists are due to clerical error, it is not in the best interest of the event to punish a player heavily for an illegal decklist. Whenever possible, it is best to correct the decklist to match the player’s actual deck.

Ambiguous or unclear names on a decklist may allow a player to manipulate the contents of their deck up until the point at which they are discovered. Use of a truncated name that is not unique may be downgraded to a Warning at the Head Judge’s discretion if they believe that the intended card is obvious and the potential for abuse minimal.

When determining if a name is ambiguous, judges may take into account the format being played.

Penalty All Levels Game Unless the judge has reason to believe that the deck itself is illegal for the format (usually the presence of an illegal card), this penalty should only be issued between rounds. In large events, the DCI recommends that tournament officials verify the legality of all lists as soon as possible, but the Head Judge should wait until the start of the next round to issue all decklist penalties. This minimizes the disruption to the game currently being played and provides consistency in case some players have finished playing their match before the penalty can be administered.

Correct a player's decklist so it is legal and then let the player continue playing in the tournament with a deck matching the corrected decklist. Any excess cards (cards violating a maximum-number-of-a-card restriction) or illegal cards should be removed from the decklist, starting with the sideboard. If a player has a legal deck after these possible corrections, the decklist should be corrected to match the deck. If further cards need to be removed from the decklist as it violates a total maximum number of cards, the cards should be removed from the bottom of the offending part of the list. Then, if cards need to be added to make the deck legal, the player should add only basic resources, such as basic lands (but not Snow-Covered basic lands) for the Magic game. Not all games have basic resources and in these cases nothing is added.

For example, a player in a Standard Constructed Magic tournament has submitted a 58-card decklist with five Naturalizes. Because there is a four-of-a-kind limit on any one card, one of the Naturalizes must be removed. Now the decklist contains 57 cards, so three basic lands of the player's choice are added to meet the 60-card minimum.

However, if the player’s actual deck contained four Naturalizes and three Terrors which were left off of the decklist,

the three Terrors would be added to the decklist and the player would be allowed to continue with his or her deck unmodified.

Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Deck (Legal Decklist)

Definition Players are considered to have an illegal deck when the contents of the deck do not match the decklist. This includes players who have lost cards, have cards from a previous opponent in their decks, have additional cards with their sideboard, or whose decks do not otherwise match their decklists.

This infraction applies to tournaments for which decklists are being used and includes errors in the sideboard. If the error is a result of a player forgetting to desideboard, please refer to Deck/Warband Error — Failure to Desideboard instead.

The infraction for a lost miniature is different and covered by section Deck/Warband Error — Lost Miniature.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament is playing with 59 cards in her deck when the minimum is 60. Her decklist indicates a legal deck with 60 cards.

A player in an Extended Magic tournament is playing with Skullclamp (a banned card) in his deck. His decklist indicates a legal deck with no banned cards.

A player in a Magic tournament has a Pacifism in his deck from a previous opponent. His decklist indicates a legal deck.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament has four copies of Blight Rat in their warband because they accidentally picked up a previous opponent’s Blight Rat.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament has listed only 15 miniatures, but is playing 16 miniatures.

A player in a Magic tournament looking at their sideboard during a game fails to keep it clearly separate from her deck.

Philosophy The decklist is the ultimate guide to a player's deck. Decklists are used to ensure that decks are not altered in the course of a tournament. If the decklist indicates a legal deck, but the actual contents of the deck do not match the decklist, the player should restore the deck to reflect the decklist. However, if the Head Judge believes that the error was obviously clerical (for example, a player marks “10 Islands” on their decklist and is only playing black cards),

the decklist should be altered to match the deck. When making this decision, judges should be mindful of potential abuse and if the potential exists or needs to be considered, they should use the contents of the decklist.

If the sideboard is not kept sufficiently separate from the deck during play, it becomes impossible to determine the legality of the deck. Additionally, if there are extra cards stored with the sideboard that could conceivably be played in the player’s deck, they will be considered a part of the sideboard.

Penalty All Levels Game The player should be instructed to make any changes necessary to make the contents of the deck match what is recorded on the decklist. In the case that cards are lost and cannot be recovered or replaced with identical cards

(proxies are not allowed for lost cards) then the missing cards should be replaced with a basic resource of the player's choice and the decklist changed to match. If these changes cannot be completed within 10 minutes, an additional Game Loss should be issued. Once the player has made the decision to play the deck with these changes,

the deck cannot be reverted to its previous list, even if the missing cards are found.

Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Deck (No Decklists)

Definition Players are considered to have illegal decks when one or more of the following conditions are true:

•

•

•

The deck contains an illegal number of cards.

The deck contains cards that are illegal for the format.

The deck contains cards that would make the deck illegal because it would violate a game rule (such as the four-card limit rule in Magic games).

This infraction applies to tournaments for which decklists are not being used.

Examples:

A player in a Standard Magic tournament has 59 cards in her deck when the minimum is 60.

A player in an Extended Magic tournament has Skullclamp (a banned card) in his deck.

A player in a Constructed Dreamblade tournament has 17 miniatures in his warband when the maximum is A player in a Constructed Dreamblade tournament is playing with a miniature whose base does not match the figure.

A player has lost several cards from her sideboard (or lost the entire sideboard).

Philosophy The DCI encourages tournaments to use decklists whenever possible, and strongly recommends them for any event with a significant prize.

If the deck contains an illegal selection of cards, the player is playing with an illegal deck. When decklists are not being used, the general philosophy is to correct a player's deck and allow the player to continue playing.

Penalty Regular Game Competitive Game Professional N/A The judge should work with the player to correct the deck. All illegal cards should be removed and, if further cards need to be removed, the player may choose which. If cards need to be added to make the deck legal, the player should add only basic resources, such as basic lands (but not Snow-Covered basic lands) for the Magic game.

Deck/Warband Error — Improper Registration of Limited Card Pool Definition This infraction applies to limited tournaments for which decklists are being used and only applies to errors made during the registration of the card pool before a deck swap or other form of registration verification. Registration errors made during deckbuilding are handled in Deck/Warband Error — Illegal Decklist.

Examples:

A player registers one copy of a card one slot below the card physically present. There are no copies of the registered card.

A player fails to register a miniature opened in a starter when registering a warband.

A player uses the “Played” column instead of the “Total” column to register the pool.

Philosophy The correctness of card pools at a limited event is important. Errors in registration are somewhat disruptive but can be easily fixed.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning Once the judge has verified that the registering player has made an error, the judge should correct and note the change on the decklist.

Deck/Warband Error — Failure to Desideboard Definition A player fails to return their deck to its original configuration before presenting it to his or her opponent at the beginning of the first game of a match. This infraction applies only to games that use sideboards. Tournaments that do not use decklists should not use this infraction unless some other method of registering sideboards is used.

Prerelease tournaments may specifically allow for a player to change their deck configuration between matches.

Note this exception is only available to official Prerelease events and is at the discretion of the Tournament organizer. Check with officials at Prereleases if they are using this option.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament leaves a Circle of Protection: Red in her deck from the previous round.

A player in a Magic tournament removes the sideboarded card from his deck after a match, but forgets to replace it with the original card.

Philosophy While this error can be common, it provides a significant advantage and is therefore a Game Loss.

Penalty All Levels Game Deck/Warband Error — Lost Miniature Definition If a warband is found to contain less than the required or registered number of miniatures or point values, but otherwise is legal (and otherwise matches what was registered), the missing miniatures are considered to be lost.

Examples:

A player in a Dreamblade tournament finds herself with only 15 miniatures instead of the 16 expected.

The 15 remaining miniatures are all registered on her registration list, but the 16th miniature registered cannot be found.

Philosophy In miniatures games, there is no advantage to playing with less than the required number of miniatures.

Penalty All Levels Caution If the miniatures are discovered to be missing during a round, or are found during a round, those miniatures may not be used in that round. If the miniature cannot be found between rounds, note which elements were lost. The player may continue playing without these miniatures until they succeed in finding them or exact copies. A player is not allowed to replace the miniatures with other, non-identical miniatures. Players should inform their opponents before starting a match that they are playing fewer than the standard number of miniatures for the tournament.

GAME PLAY ERRORS Game play errors are caused by incorrect or inaccurate play of the game such that it results in violations of the game rules. Many offenses fit into this category and it would be impossible to list them all. The guide below is designed to give judges a framework for assessing how to handle a Game Play Error.

All penalties in this section presume that the error was committed unintentionally. If the judge believes that the error was intentional, the appropriate Cheating infraction should be used instead. Some infractions (such as Drawing Extra Cards) have their own separate penalties defined specific to their game types. All remaining Game Play Errors fall into one of the following five categories:

If the error is a simple clerical error, it is Game Play Error — Incorrect Representation.

If the game state is presently illegal, it is Game Play Error — Illegal Game State.

If the error occurred as the result of a player forgetting a game trigger, it is Game Play Error — Missed Trigger.

If the error involves a failure to reveal information it is Game Play Error — Failure to Reveal All other errors are defined as Game Play Error — Game Rule Violation.

Both players are expected to maintain the game rules, and to share some responsibility for any errors that may occur involving public information. As a result, no attempt should be made to determine or correct any advantage gained in assessing the penalty and associated procedures for fixing the offense. Additionally, a sixth type of Game Play Error - Failure to Maintain Game State - should be issued to the opponent where specified by the other five infractions. In multiplayer games, all participants in the match other than the offending player should receive this penalty if issued.

An error that an opponent can not realize has been committed should have its penalty upgraded. Such unnoticeable errors are rare and involve misplaying hidden information (such as the Morph ability). An unpreventable or irreversible error is not sufficient grounds for such an upgrade.

Because of the diverse nature of Game Play Errors, care should be taken when upgrading penalties. Game Play Error penalties should not be upgraded for different offenses that fall under the same category of infraction, unless the offenses themselves are very similar.

Game Play Error — Incorrect Representation Definition Due to a minor clerical error, the game is somehow inaccurately represented, but the game state is clear to both players and the action ultimately legal. If the error has affected game play or been allowed to continue to the point where ambiguity exists, it should be treated as a Game Play Error — Game Rule Violation instead.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament forgets to untap his land before moving to his upkeep.

A player in a Magic tournament places a spell into the graveyard before it has finished resolving.

A player in a Magic tournament forgets to put counters onto a creature that comes into play with counters on it.

Philosophy These errors do not have a significant impact on the game, but could cause confusion at a later point if not remedied.

Penalty All Levels Caution Correct the erroneous representation.

Game Play Error — Illegal Game State Definition The ongoing state of the current game is illegal as a result of a prior misplay.

Examples:

In a Magic tournament, two copies of the same Legendary permanent are in play.

In a Magic tournament, an Armadillo Cloak (cost 1GW) is enchanting a creature with Protection from Green.

Philosophy Both players share a responsibility in allowing the game to continue in this illegal state. Because many decisions and plans may have been made based on this state, no effort should be made to back up the game and fix it or try to compensate for the effects of the illegal state.

Penalty All Levels Warning Apply state-based effects or other game-specific ways of making a game state legal. In addition, the opponents and teammates of the player controlling the permanent that caused the game state to become illegal should receive a Game Play Error — Failure to Maintain Game State infraction.

Game Play Error — Missed Trigger Definition A game event triggers, but the player controlling the trigger is unaware of its existence and/or forgets to perform the actions specified by the trigger.

Examples:

In a Magic tournament, a player has Braids, Cabal Minion in play. After he has declared attackers, he realizes that he has failed to sacrifice a permanent to Braids' upkeep trigger.

In a Magic tournament, a player realizes that she forgot to remove the final counter from a Suspend spell.

In a Magic tournament, a player forgets to pay Cumulative Upkeep for a creature.

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player forgets to sacrifice a creature to the Appease ability of Eater of Hope when it was spawned.

Philosophy Most games have "triggers" — actions that the game asks players to take as a result an event occurring. Because the representation of these triggers is invisible, players will miss them on occasion.

Penalty All Levels Warning If the trigger instruction is optional (“may”) and specifies no consequence for not doing it, assume that the player has chosen not to perform the instruction and issue no penalty.

If the trigger requires no choices to be made and has no effect on the visual representation of the game, assume the ability resolved at the appropriate time and issue no penalty. The visual representation consists of elements the players are able to see happening or in play, such as zone changes and adding counters to permanents, as well as life totals.

If the trigger has an instruction that specifies a default action associated with a choice (usually "If you don't ... ")

resolve the default action immediately without regard to the timing rules for that particular game. For example, in Magic, such a default action would be resolved without using the stack. If there are unresolved spells or effects that are no longer legal as a result of this action, rewind the game to remove all such spells or abilities. Resulting triggers generated by the action still trigger and resolve as normal.

If the trigger requires a choice that does not have a default action or a trigger with no choice will have an effect on the visual representation of the game, and the error is caught within the scope of a turn cycle (see below for definition), resolve the forgotten ability using game-specific timing rules. For example, in a Magic game, the forgotten ability would be placed on the stack. The player may not make choices involving objects that were not in the zone or zones referenced by the trigger when the ability triggered. If the error is discovered partway through an action (such as choosing blockers in Magic), back up to the beginning of that action. If the error is discovered after a turn cycle, continue the game without resolving the forgotten trigger.

For Magic, a turn cycle is defined as the time from the beginning of a player's step or phase to the end of that player's next same step or phase. For Dreamblade, it is defined as a single phase. If a turn cycle would end in a skipped step or phase (but not turn), the turn cycle expires when the step or phase is skipped.

If the missed trigger is not caught immediately, opponents and teammates should receive a Game Play Error —

Failure to Maintain Game State penalty. The opponents may not be able to recognize that a trigger has been missed until after some other irrevocable action has been taken, and this should be taken into account in determining whether it was caught immediately. No attempt should be made to rewind the game state to the point of the missed trigger.

Game Play Error — Failure to Reveal Definition A player forgets to reveal information that they have been instructed to reveal by a game rule or effect.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament plays Worldly Tutor and places the card he searched for on top of his library without revealing it.

A player in a Magic tournament resolves the trigger from his Dark Confidant., but puts the card directly into his hand.

At the end of a game in a Magic tournament, a player shuffles her morph card back into her library without revealing it.

Philosophy Failing to reveal a card prevents opponents from verifying that an effect was played correctly. While the error is easy to make, the potential for abuse is high and the DCI wishes to track players who repeatedly commit this infraction.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Game Professional Game Few of these errors can caught before the exact information and location of the unrevealed information is lost. If the card was ever in a position to be uniquely identified (such as on top of the player's library or the only card in hand),

downgrade this penalty at Regular and Competitive RELs. If the card is still uniquely identifiable, reveal it to all appropriate players. Additionally, if not caught immediately, opponents and teammates should receive a Game Play Error — Failure to Maintain Game State penalty.

Game Play Error — Game Rule Violation Definition This infraction covers the majority of game situations in which a player makes an error or fails to follow a game procedure correctly. Note that this is different from entirely forgetting a game trigger, which is handled in Game Play Error — Missed Trigger, a situation in which the game state itself is illegal, which is handled in Game Play Error — Illegal Game State, or forgetting to reveal a card, which is handled in Game Play Error — Failure to Reveal.

Examples:

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player forgets to pay extra spawn points for a miniature when that player does not have miniatures of the appropriate aspects in play or in the graveyard.

In a Magic tournament, a player plays Wrath of God for 3W (actual cost 2WW).

In a Magic tournament, a player does not attack with a creature that must attack each turn.

In a Magic tournament, a player puts Serra Avatar into their graveyard instead of shuffling it into their library.

In a Magic tournament, a player fails to put a creature with lethal damage into a graveyard and it is not noticed until several turns later.

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player fails to assign blades before moving on to assign damage in combat.

In a Dreamblade tournament, two locations are occupying the same cell.

A player in a Magic tournament fails to draw her card for her turn.

Philosophy While Game Rule Violations can be attributed to one player, they usually occur publicly and both players are expected to be mindful of what is happening in the game. It is tempting to try and "fix" these errors and reverse actions that have since been taken in the game, but it is important that all judges be able to apply these penalties consistently, regardless of their skill in the game, and thus only errors that are caught immediately should be fixed.

Penalty All Levels Warning If the error was caught immediately, back up the game to the point of the error. If not caught immediately, leave the game state as it is. Additionally, if not caught immediately, opponents and teammates should receive a Game Play Error — Failure to Maintain Game State penalty.

Game Play Error — Failure to Maintain Game State Definition This infraction is committed by a player who has allowed their opponent to commit a Game Play Error and has not pointed it out it immediately and before they could potentially gain advantage. If a judge believes a player is intentionally not pointing out their opponent’s illegal actions, either for their own advantage, or in the hope of bringing it up at a more strategically advantageous time, the infraction is Cheating — Fraud.

Examples:

In a Magic tournament, a player's opponent forgets to discard a card to Masticore during their upkeep. It is not noticed until the end of turn.

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player’s opponent forgets to sacrifice a creature after spawning a creature with the Appease ability. The error is not noticed until the end of turn.

Philosophy If an error is caught immediately, then the dangers of the ongoing game state becoming corrupted are much lower. If the error is allowed to persist, at least some of the fault lies with the opponent, who has also failed to notice the error.

Penalty All Levels Warning Judges should not usually upgrade this penalty, as players will be reluctant to call a judge if they believe that they could receive a significant penalty as a result.

TOURNAMENT ERRORS Tournament errors are unintentional violations of the Universal Tournament Rules or the Floor Rules for the game being played.

Tournament Error — Tardiness Definition A player fails to comply with announced time limits.

Examples:

A player arrives to her seat 5 minutes after the round begins.

A player hands in his decklist after the time designated by the judge or organizer.

A player loses his or her deck and must find replacement cards after the round has begun.

Philosophy Players are responsible for being on time for their matches and completing registrations in a timely manner.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Game Professional Game A penalty should not be given if a round started early and a player arrived at his or her seat before the originally announced start time. At Regular and Competitive events, or in tournaments where matches consist of a single game, the tournament organizer may elect to give players the amount of time allotted for the pre-game procedure (3 minutes) before a penalty is issued. Otherwise, the appropriate penalty should be issued as soon as the round begins.

At any REL, if a player is not in his or her seat 10 minutes into the round, he or she should be issued a second Game Loss (or two Game Losses at Regular REL). A player receiving two Game Losses for Tardiness in the same round

(or one Game Loss for single-game matches) is dropped from the tournament unless they report to the Head Judge or Scorekeeper before the end of the round.

In tournaments with single-game matches a time extension equal to the amount of tardiness should be applied if it is within the pre-game procedure time limit. Game Losses should not be replaced by Match Point penalties for Tardiness. Repeated Tardiness infractions should only be upgraded in exceptional circumstances.

Tournament Error — Playing the Wrong Opponent Definition Two people played or are playing against each other when they were paired against different players for that round.

Example A player sits at an incorrect table and plays the wrong opponent.

A player in a team event who is designated as "Player A" plays "Player C" on the other team.

Philosophy It is both players’ responsibility to ensure they are playing their designated opponent before beginning play.

Penalty All Levels Warning Both players should receive this penalty. If the error is discovered within the pregame time limit for the first game,

the player sitting at the wrong table should report to the correct seat. If the error is discovered after the pregame time limit has expired, but before the time a second Game Loss would be issued for Tournament Error — Tardiness, the player sitting at the wrong table should receive a Game Loss and should report to the correct table. If the error is not discovered until after the time a second Game Loss would be issued for Tournament Error — Tardiness, the player sitting at the wrong table should receive a second Game Loss.

Tournament Error — Slow Play Definition Players who take longer than is reasonably required to complete game actions are engaging in Slow Play. If a judge believes a player is intentionally playing slowly to take advantage of a time limit, a Cheating — Stalling infraction should be used instead.

Examples:

A player in a Dreamblade tournament repeatedly manipulates his figures without committing to a specific course of action.

A player in a Magic tournament repeatedly reviews his opponent’s graveyard without any significant change in game state.

A player in a Magic tournament spends time writing down the contents of an opponent's deck when resolving Haunting Echoes.

After 3 minutes into a round at a Magic Pro Tour™ Qualifier, a player has not completed his shuffling.

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player takes an unreasonable amount of time deciding which creatures to spawn.

A player gets up from their seat to look at standings, or goes to the bathroom without permission of an official.

Philosophy All players have the responsibility to play quickly enough so that their opponents are not at a significant disadvantage because of the time limit. A player may be playing slowly without realizing it. At lower RELs a comment of “I need you to play faster” is often appropriate and all that is needed. Further slow play should be penalized.

Penalty All Levels Warning An extra turn is awarded for each player, to be applied if the match exceeds the time limit. For games in which a single turn encompasses equal actions for both players, such as Dreamblade, only a single turn is added. This turn extension occurs before any end-of-match procedure can begin and after any time extensions that may have been issued. If multiple players on each side are playing the same game (such as in Two-Headed Giant) only one extra turn should be awarded per team.

No extra turns should be awarded if the match is already in extra turns, though the Warning still applies.

If Slow Play has significantly affected the result of the match, the Head Judge may upgrade the penalty.

Tournament Error — Insufficient Randomization Definition A player unintentionally fails to sufficiently randomize their deck before presenting it to their opponent. If the insufficient randomization was intentional, a Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials infraction should be used instead.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament forgets to shuffle his library after searching for a card.

A player in a Magic tournament searches for a card, then gives the deck a single riffle-shuffle before presenting the deck to her opponent.

Philosophy Players are expected to randomize their deck thoroughly when it is required and are expected, especially at Competitive and Professional RELs, to have the skill and understanding of randomization to do so. Any time cards in a deck could be seen, including during shuffling, it is no longer randomized, even if the player only knows the position of one or two cards. Players should take care in shuffling not to reveal cards to themselves, their teammates or their opponents.

Players are assumed to know the order of their cards before starting to shuffle and sufficient randomization means the player could not gain advantage from this knowledge. A player should randomize his or her deck using multiple methods. Patterned pile-shuffling alone is not sufficient randomization.

Any manipulation, weaving or stacking prior to randomization is acceptable, as long as the deck is thoroughly randomized afterwards. Doing so and not sufficiently randomizing afterwards should be treated as Cheating —

Manipulation of Game Materials.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Game Professional Game If a Game Loss is called for in the Swiss portion of an event that has single-game matches, a Match Point penalty should be issued instead and the game should be continued. If the game is to be continued, the deck should be thoroughly randomized.

Tournament Error — Failure to Follow Official Announcements Definition This infraction is committed by a player who fails to follow an instruction given to a broad audience they are included in. Most often these are registration instructions, safety instructions, or venue rules. Instructions given directly to an individual and not followed are penalized as Unsporting Conduct – Major.

Examples:

In a tournament, a player forgets to list their name or DCI# on a decklist following such an announcement made during the tournament registration period.

A player smokes in a venue where signage indicates such is forbidden.

A player fails to leave an area of the venue that a general announcement has asked all players to leave.

Philosophy Players are required to be attentive and follow the instructions of tournament officials for the efficiency of the tournament and safety of all.

Penalty All Levels Warning Tournament Error — Draft Procedure Violation Definition A player commits a technical error during a draft. This does not cover any attempts to view or reveal cards that are hidden, which is handled by Cheating — Outside Assistance.

Examples:

A player passes a booster to his left when it is supposed to go to his right.

A player exceeds the amount of time allotted for a pick.

A player starts to put a card on top of their pile, then pulls it back.

Philosophy Errors in draft procedure are disruptive and may become more so if they are not caught quickly.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Caution Professional Warning Announcements prior to the draft, or the specific Floor Rules for the format may specify additional penalties for Draft Procedure Violations.

Tournament Error — Player Communication Violation Definition A player unintentionally violates the Player Communication guidelines (see section 50). Intentional violations, or attempting to take advantage of a previously committed violation, should be treated as Cheating – Fraud.

Example A player in a Magic tournament is asked how many cards they have in hand and answers “Three.” A few moments later, they realize that they have four.

A player in a Magic tournament claims they haven’t played their land for the turn, but it is determined that they had just forgotten.

Philosophy Clear communication is essential in playing of any DCI-sanctioned game, and many offenses will be intentional.

However, it is possible for a player to make a genuine mistake and, while unfortunate, these should not be penalized harshly.

Penalty All Levels Warning UNSPORTING CONDUCT Unsporting conduct is disruptive behavior that may affect the safety, competitiveness, or enjoyment of an event in a significantly negative fashion. An offense that doesn't seek in-game advantage should be considered unsporting behavior. If it could provide an in-game advantage the offense should be handled by other infractions in the Penalty Guide.

Being enrolled in the tournament is not a requirement to receive an Unsporting Conduct penalty. Although these guidelines refer to players, other people in the venue, such as spectators, staff or judges are held to the same standard of behavior.

Unsporting behavior is not the same as a lack of sporting behavior. There is a wide middle ground of "competitive"

behavior that is certainly neither "nice" nor "sporting" but still doesn't qualify as "unsporting." The Head Judge is the final arbiter on what constitutes unsporting conduct.

Judges should inform the player how their conduct is disruptive. The player is expected to correct the situation and behavior immediately. However, while making sure that the player understands the severity of their actions is important, judges should always seek to defuse a situation rather than make a conflict worse.

Unsporting Conduct — Minor Definition Unsporting Conduct — Minor is action taken by an individual that is disruptive to the tournament or its participants.

It may affect the comfort level of those around the individual, but determining whether this is the case is not required.

Examples:

A player uses excessively vulgar and profane language.

A player inappropriately demands to a judge that her opponent receive a penalty.

A player appeals to the Head Judge before waiting for the floor judge to issue a ruling.

A player taunts their opponent for making a bad play.

A player leaves excessive trash in the play area after leaving the table.

Philosophy All participants should expect a safe and enjoyable environment at a tournament, and a participant needs to be made aware that their behavior is unacceptable so that this environment may be maintained Penalty All Levels Warning In addition to the Warning, the player should correct the problem immediately or face upgraded penalties for repeated infractions. Unlike Game Play Errors, a judge may upgrade repeated Unsporting Conduct — Minor infractions for different offenses.

If a Game Loss is issued for repeated or upgraded infractions, and it occurs at the end of a game, it is acceptable for the judge to apply the penalty to the next game instead. Game Losses (in case of upgrade) should never be replaced by Match Point penalties for Unsporting Conduct — Minor.

Unsporting Conduct — Major Definition Unsporting Conduct — Major infractions fall into three categories:

•

•

•

Failing to follow a direct instruction from a tournament official.

Insulting another person based on their race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, disability or sexual orientation.

Aggressive or violent behavior that is not directed at another person or another person’s property.

Examples:

A player is asked to leave the play area and is still watching a match a few minutes later.

A player continues to argue with the Head Judge about a ruling after being asked to stop doing so.

A player uses a racial slur against their opponent.

After losing a match, a player throws his cards onto the table and knocks his chair over in anger.

A player in a Magic tournament picks up one of his tokens that has been removed from the game and tosses it across the room.

Philosophy Officials should expect their instructions to be followed without needing to issue an interim warning. This only applies to specific and directed instructions. Failure to follow general announcements is handled through specific infractions or in Tournament Error — Failure to Follow Official Instructions.

Hate speech and other insults targeted at a protected class indicate a deeper issue and should be dealt with swiftly.

Even if unfounded, they may be offensive to spectators or other nearby individuals. Local areas may have additional protected classes that fall under this category.

Undirected aggressive behavior needs to be curtailed. It is disruptive, can leave a lasting negative impression on those around, and may turn to directed aggressive behavior if not dealt with swiftly. Care should be taken not to escalate the situation if at all possible. The player may need to be removed from the area to receive the penalty and may need a few moments to cool down, in which case a time extension should be granted.

Penalty All Levels Game The player should correct the behavior immediately, and be expected to refrain from similar behavior or face more severe penalties. As with Unsporting Conduct — Minor infractions that have been upgraded due to repetition, if the offense occurs at the end of a game, it is acceptable for the judge to apply the penalty to the next game instead. In single-game matches, Match Point penalties should not be issued for Unsporting Conduct — Major.

Unsporting Conduct — Randomly Determining a Winner Definition Players use or offer to use a random method to determine the winner of a game or match.

Examples:

As time is called in a tournament, two players about to draw roll a die to determine the winner.

A player offers to flip a coin to determine the winner of a match.

Philosophy Using a random method to determine a winner compromises the integrity of the tournament.

Matches that should result in a draw due to time are expected to be reported as such and are not excluded from this penalty if the players use a random method to determine the outcome.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize In most cases this penalty will be issued to both players, unless the other player calls over a judge as soon as the suggestion to randomly determine the winner is made.

Unsporting Conduct — Bribery and Wagering Definition Bribery occurs when a player offers an incentive to entice an opponent into conceding, drawing, or changing the results of a match. Refer to section 25 of the Universal Tournament Rules for a more detailed description of what constitutes bribery.

Wagering occurs when a player or spectator at a tournament places a bet on the outcome of a tournament, match or any portion of a tournament or match. The wager does not need to be monetary, nor is it relevant if a player is not betting on their own match.

Examples:

A player in a Swiss round offers his opponent $100 to concede the match.

A player offers his opponent a card in exchange for a draw.

A player asks for a concession in exchange for a prize split.

Two players in a Magic tournament agree that the winner of the match will be able to choose a rare card out of the other person’s deck after the match.

Two spectators at a Dreamblade tournament place a bet on the over/under of total victory points in a match.

Philosophy Bribery and wagering disrupt the integrity of the tournament and are strictly forbidden. Please refer to section 25 of the Universal Tournament Rules to ensure the proper application of this penalty.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize Unsporting Conduct — Aggressive Behavior Definition A player acts in a threatening way towards others or their property.

Examples:

A player threatens to hit another player who won’t concede to them.

A player pulls a chair out from under another player, causing her to fall to the ground.

A player makes threats against a judge after receiving a ruling.

A player tears up a card belonging to another player.

A player intentionally turns over a table.

Philosophy The safety of all people at a tournament is of paramount importance. There will be no tolerance of physical abuse or intimidation.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize The player should be asked to leave the venue by the organizer.

Unsporting Conduct — Theft of Tournament Material Definition A player steals material from the event, such as cards or miniatures.

Examples:

A player in a limited tournament pockets a Magic foil rare that they opened in the sealed pool they are registering.

A player steals cards from the sideboard of their opponent.

A player steals the table number from a table.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament realizes they have a previous opponent’s miniature, but they hide it instead of telling a tournament official.

Philosophy Players should enter a tournament expecting that their materials will be protected. This does not absolve the players from their responsibility to keep an eye on their possessions, but they should expect to be able to retain the product they began with or were given for the tournament. Other instances of theft not involving tournament materials are the responsibility of the Tournament organizer, though judges are encouraged to help in any way possible.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize The player should be asked to leave the venue by the organizer.

CHEATING This section deals with intentionally committed infractions that can give a player a significant advantage.

Knowledge that the action is illegal is not required for the infraction to be Cheating.

Cheating — Stalling Definition A player intentionally plays slowly in order to take advantage of the time limit. If the slow play is not intentional,

please refer to Tournament Error — Slow Play instead.

Example A player in a Magic tournament has two lands in his hand, no options available to significantly affect the game, and spends time "thinking" about what to do.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament is ahead in turns and significantly slows down their pace of play so the opponent has little chance to catch up.

A player playing slowly appeals a warning in an attempt to gain advantage by having more time to make a decision.

Philosophy If it is clear that a player is stalling, the integrity of the match is compromised and he or she should face a serious penalty.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize Cheating — Fraud Definition A person intentionally violates the Player Communication policy (see section 50) or intentionally misrepresents procedures, personal information or any other relevant tournament information in an attempt to gain advantage.

(Note that Fraud, like most cheating, is determined by an investigation and will often appear on the surface as a Game Play Error or Tournament Error.)

Examples:

A player enters a tournament under an assumed name and/or using a different DCI number in an attempt to manipulate ratings.

A player alters the actual results of a match to tournament officials.

A player lies to a tournament official to gain or keep an advantage.

A player in a Magic tournament lies to their opponent about their life total.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament intentionally spawns more miniatures than is possible with the current spawn points.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament realizes that his opponent has stated spawn points incorrectly, but chooses not to correct this because it is to his advantage.

A player gives false or misleading information to a judge or tournament official that helps another player to cheat.

Philosophy There should be zero tolerance for this type of activity. One does not need to be a player in a game to commit Fraud.

In particular, teammates observing the game are expected to point out problems and summon a judge to help deal with them if necessary.

A player must be aware that they have committed a error in representation in order for the infraction to be Fraud.

For example, a player targeting a black creature with Terror has not committed Fraud if they forgot that Terror can not target black creatures, even though the action (playing Terror) was intentional and illegal. It is Fraud if a judge believes they were aware and hoping that their opponent would miss it.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize Cheating — Outside Assistance Definition A player, spectator, or other tournament participant intentionally does any of the following:

•

•

•

•

•

Seeks advice from others once they have sat for their match.

Gives advice to players who have sat for their match.

Any time after arriving at the play table, a player references notes made before the official beginning of their current match.

Illegally seeks information that is hidden from them by the rules of the game or format.

Reveals information they are prohibited from revealing by the rules of the game, policy, or format.

These offenses also apply to any deck construction portions of a limited tournament. Additionally, no notes of any kind may be made during a draft.

Notes made during a match may be referenced during that match or between matches. Notes made outside the current match may not be referenced once a player has sat for their match until after their match is completed.

Team events and multiplayer events have specific communication policies that may override these.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament references sideboarding notes brought to the tournament during a match.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament references notes about his opponent’s warband after arriving at the table for their match.

A player in a Magic booster draft reveals a card they drafted to another player during the draft.

D A player in a Magic booster draft peeks at the cards from which their neighbor is selecting.

A player in a Magic tournament peeks at the bottom card of his opponent’s deck while cutting it.

Philosophy Tournaments test the skill of a player, not their ability to follow external advice or directions. Any strategy advice,

play advice or construction advice from an external source is considered assistance. Any notes taken prior to the official start of the match are also illegal. Notes made during a match are legal to reference during the match or between future matches. Notes made outside the current match may not be referenced between the arriving at the table for the match and the completion of the match.

Knowledge of hidden information is a form of outside assistance, and any attempt to gain it, or reveal it when not allowed to is considered cheating Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials Definition A player intentionally manipulates game materials (cards, dice, sleeves, figures, etc.) illegally to their advantage.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament orders some cards in their deck during a search and does not sufficiently randomize afterwards.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament intentionally rolls dice into other dice that have been rolled but not tabulated, in an attempt to change the result.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament moves a figure while their opponent is not looking.

A player in a Magic tournament marks all of their Islands with a thumbnail mark on the corner of the sleeve.

A player in a Magic tournament draws cards not entitled to when his opponent is not looking.

Philosophy There will be no tolerance for such blatant disregard for the rules.

Penalty All Levels Disqualification without prize CARD GAME-SPECIFIC INFRACTIONS These infractions apply to games using cards, such as Duelmasters and Magic. They are intended to provide guidance for issues that come up during card games, such as errors in Card Drawing and Marked Cards.

CARD DRAWING Card Drawing — Looking at Extra Cards Definition Players are considered to have looked at a card when they have been able to observe the face of a hidden card, or when a card is moved any significant amount from a deck, but before it touches the other cards in their hand. This includes errors of dexterity or catching a play error before the card is placed into their hand. Once a card has been placed into their hand or if a player takes a game action after removing the card from the library, the penalty is Card Drawing — Drawing Extra Cards.

A player is not considered to have looked at extra cards when he or she places a card face down on the table

(without looking at the card) in an effort to count out cards he or she will draw.

This penalty should be applied only once if one or more cards are seen in the same action or sequence of actions.

Examples:

A player accidentally reveals (drops, flips over) a card while shuffling her opponent's deck.

A player flips over an extra card while drawing from his deck.

A player sees the bottom card of her deck when presenting it to her opponent for cutting/shuffling A player takes a card from her opponent's deck instead of her own.

A player in a Magic tournament activates a Sensei's Divining Top that is no longer in play, and sees 3 cards before the mistake is noticed.

Philosophy A player can accidentally look at extra cards very easily, so the penalty is less severe than Card Drawing - Drawing Extra Cards. Drawing extra cards is a separate, more severe infraction because of the increased potential for abuse.

Players should not be using this penalty to get a "free shuffle," or to attempt to shuffle away cards they don't want to draw. This should be considered Cheating — Fraud and penalized accordingly. Players also should not be allowed to use this penalty as a stalling mechanism. The deck is already randomized, so shuffling in the revealed cards should not involve an excessive amount of effort. Make sure to give sufficient extra time to account for the shuffling.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning In addition to the appropriate penalty, the situation should always be corrected. The player should shuffle the randomized portion of his deck (which may include the cards that were seen, if they were part of the random portion of the library). This requires first determining whether any portion of the deck is non-random, such as cards that have been manipulated on the top or bottom of the library, and separating those. Once the deck has been shuffled,

any manipulated cards should be returned to their correct locations.

Care must be taken before shuffling to make sure that there are no "legally known" cards in the library. Check with both players to verify this, and check the graveyard, removed from game and in-play zones for deck manipulation cards, such as Brainstorm and cards with the Scry mechanic.

Card Drawing — Drawing Extra Cards Definition This penalty is given when a player draws a card that they were not supposed to. A card is considered drawn once it touches the other cards in a player's hand. Even if both players believe they can identify the card in question afterwards, the potential for abuse necessitates the stronger penalty at that point. Up until then, the card is easily identified and the situation can be rectified. If the player has an empty hand when drawing the card, bringing the hands together is an indication that the cards have been drawn Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament draws 4 cards after playing Ancestral Recall.

A player in a Magic tournament draws an extra card from the ability of a Howling Mine that is no longer in play.

Philosophy Though this error is easy to commit accidentally, the potential for advantage and the potential for it to be overlooked mandate a higher level of penalty.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Game Professional Game If a Game Loss is called for in the Swiss portion of an event that has single-game matches, a Match Point penalty should be issued instead. If the game is to continue, a random card from the player’s hand should be placed on top of their library for each extra card drawn.

Card Drawing — Improper Drawing at Start of Game Definition Players committing this infraction draw extra cards (or too few cards) when they draw their hands, either initially or while resolving a mulligan.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament draws eight cards in her initial hand (instead of seven).

A player in a Magic tournament draws seven cards in his initial hand (instead of six) after taking a mulligan.

A player in a Magic tournament who is playing first (as opposed to drawing first) incorrectly draws a card during her first draw step.

Philosophy This is generally a minor infraction and deserves a fairly minor penalty. Forcing players who have drawn too many cards to redraw their hands with one less card is fairly quick and simple and avoids the possibility of a player gaining an advantage if he or she just had to reshuffle his or her cards and draw a new hand.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning If the player has drawn too few cards, they should draw up to the correct number. If the player has drawn too many cards, he or she must shuffle his or her hand into his or her deck and redraw the opening hand, drawing one less card than the number he or she should have drawn—not the number he or she actually drew. (This is similar to a forcing a mulligan in a Magic game.)

Card Drawing — Failure to Discard Definition A player forgets to discard a card when required to by an effect or the rules of the game.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament discards a single non-land card to Compulsive Research.

A player in a Magic tournament forgets to discard down to seven cards at the end of his turn.

Philosophy While this is technically a Game Rule Violation, the penalty requires an additional fix to mitigate the potential advantage.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning The player should discard the number of cards that they were supposed to.

MARKED CARDS This section deals with marked cards or sleeves. As always, the penalties for these infractions assume the offense was unintentional. If the Head Judge believes the markings are intentional or the player is taking advantage of the markings, he or she should refer to Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials.

If the player is using sleeves, the cards must be examined while in the sleeves to determine if they are marked.

Marked Cards — No Pattern Definition A player's cards are marked or oriented in a way that is unlikely to give an advantage to that player.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament has small marks on a few of his sleeves. The markings are on a Mountain,

a Loxodon Hierarch, and a Lightning Helix.

A player without sleeves has several premium cards that stand out significantly from the rest of her deck.

Philosophy If the possibility for advantage is fairly low, the player should not receive a significant penalty. Note that almost all sleeves can be considered marked in some way; judges should keep this in mind when determining penalties. In cases of marked cards, educating players to shuffle their cards and sleeves before sleeving the cards is very important. A Marked Cards — No Pattern penalty should generally not be upgraded on repeat offenses.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning The player should be required to replace the card(s) or sleeve(s) with an unmarked version or use sleeves that conceal the markings if no sleeves are being used. If the cards themselves have become marked through play in the tournament, the Head Judge may decide to issue a proxy.

Marked Cards — Pattern Definition A player's cards are marked or oriented in a way that could potentially give a significant advantage to that player.

Examples:

A player in a Magic tournament has a marking on each of his land cards that makes them easily distinguishable from the rest of the deck.

A player in a Magic tournament has four Early Harvests in her deck, all of which are in card sleeves that have a slight bend in one corner.

A player playing without sleeves has all of their spells of one color turned upside down.

Philosophy If the possibility for advantage is high, the player should receive a significant penalty. This penalty still presumes that the cards are marked unintentionally. If the Head Judge believes the cards were marked intentionally, he or she should refer to Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials instead.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Game Professional Game The player should be required to replace the card(s) or sleeve(s) with an unmarked version or use sleeves that conceal the markings if no sleeves are being used. If the cards themselves have become marked through play in the tournament, the Head Judge may decide to issue a proxy.

If a Game Loss is called for in the Swiss portion of an event that has single-game matches, a Match Point penalty should be issued instead and the game should be continued.

MINIATURES GAME-SPECIFIC INFRACTIONS These infractions are intended for use in games that involve miniatures, such as Dreamblade and Dungeons &

Dragons® Miniatures.

DICE ERRORS Many miniatures games require players to determine a number of dice to be rolled. It is possible for players to miscount the total they are supposed to roll or the number of dice they actually select to roll.

Dice Error — Too Few Rolled Definition A player rolls fewer dice than required.

Examples:

A player in a Dreamblade tournament attacks with a seven-power creature, but only rolls six attack dice.

A player in a Dreamblade tournament rolls three attack dice for a deathblow when the creature’s power is five.

Philosophy This is generally a minor infraction and deserves a fairly minor penalty. There is little advantage to be gained.

Penalty Regular Caution Competitive Warning Professional Warning The player needs to record the result of dice already rolled and then roll the remaining dice required, total the results and continue.

Dice Error — Too Many Rolled Definition A player rolls more dice than required.

Examples:

In a Dreamblade tournament, a player rolls six attack dice when the combined power of his attackers is only five.

Philosophy While some random method of eliminating the extra rolled dice could be applied to remove the results of those dice,

the potential advantage of a player rolling extra dice without his or her opponent either noticing or being able to prevent it is significant.

Penalty Regular Warning Competitive Warning Professional Game The opponent chooses which extra dice are not used.

If a Game Loss is called for in the Swiss portion of an event that has single-game matches, a Match Point penalty should be issued instead and the game should be continued.

APPENDIX A — PENALTY QUICK REFERENCE Infraction Regular Competitive Deck/Warband Error (DWE)

DWE — Illegal Decklist DWE — Illegal Deck (Legal Decklist)

DWE — Illegal Deck (No Decklists)

Game DWE — Improper Registration of Limited Card Pool Caution DWE — Failure to Desideboard DWE — Lost Miniature Professional Game Game N/A Warning Game*

Caution Game Play Error (GPE)

GPE — Incorrect Representation GPE— Illegal Game State GPE — Missed Trigger GPE — Game Rule Violation GPE — Failure to Maintain Game State Caution Warning Warning Warning Warning Tournament Error (TE)

TE — Tardiness Warning TE — Playing the Wrong Opponent TE — Slow Play TE — Insufficient Randomization Warning TE — Failure to Follow Official Announcements TE — Draft Procedure Violation Caution Game*

Warning Warning Game Warning Warning Unsporting Conduct (USC)

USC — Minor USC — Major USC — Randomly Determining a Winner USC — Bribery USC — Aggressive Behavior USC — Theft of Tournament Material Warning Game*

Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Cheating Cheating Cheating Cheating Cheating

— Stalling

— Fraud

— Outside Assistance

— Manipulation of Game Materials Looking at Extra Cards Drawing Extra Cards Improper Drawing at Start of Game Failure to Discard Marked Cards — No Pattern Marked Cards — Pattern Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Card Game-Specific Caution Warning Caution Caution Caution Warning Warning Game Warning Warning Warning Game Miniatures Game-Specific Dice Error — Too Few Rolled Caution Warning Dice Error — Too Many Rolled Warning Warning Game

*A Match Point penalty should not be used to replace this penalty in Swiss single-game matches.

APPENDIX B — CHANGES FROM PREVIOUS VERSION September 1, 2007 Game Loss: Clarification on how to handle simultaneous Game Loss penalties.

Clarified when Game Loss and Match Loss should be applied if the game or match already complete.

Added section on Player Communication Downgrade option for potentially ambiguous but clear registrations.

Allowing for use of a format in determining card ambiguity.

Added extra cards in the sideboard and mingling the sideboard during play as subsets of the infraction.

Clarified a swap is not required to award this penalty.

Clarified upgrading errors regarding hidden information.

Moved to 125 new penalty for Game Play Error – Failure to Reveal added.

Moved to 126 Added, was old 125 Added Tournament Error – Player Communication Violation.

Revised definition of Fraud to accommodate new communication policy.

Making it clear that spectators not enrolled in the tournament can commit this violation.

Appendix C: added notice - Please stop using DCI Reporter V2.X by January 1, 2008 June 1, 2007 General: Cleaning up the use of “offense,” “infraction,” and “penalty.”

General: Using the terms “public information” and “hidden information” to align with the Comprehensive Rules.

Modified advice on handling penalties that are not covered in the Penalty Guide from the Introduction.

Clarification that sideboards are considered to be part of a player’s deck.

Clarified use of Match Point penalties for single game matches.

Clarified the use of Failure to Maintain Game State for matches involving teammates.

Explanation of how to handle a turn cycle if the relevant step or phase is skipped.

Added example I: failure to draw a card.

Clarified the definition of Fraud as it applies to people not involved in the game.

Clarified that Fraud requires awareness that the action taken is illegal.

Replaced ‘misrepresents’ with ‘falsely represents’ to clarify the representation must be untrues.

Appendix C — Using Reporter V2.X with these guidelines DCI Reporter Version 3 has been updated to match these guidelines. Organizers may download the most recent version by visiting the TO center. https://membership.wizards.com/login.aspx?dcionly=true Log in with the DCI number and password you upload events with. Then click downloads. Download the first 3 files, the update, the full installation and the latest PIN database (.mdb file).

KNOWN ISSUES AND SOLUTIONS:

DCI Reporter 2.X cannot be updated to handle the penalties in this Guide. To issue a penalty using Reporter 2.X refer to the table on the following page. Enter the old infraction that corresponds to the new Penalty Guide infraction and enter the name of the new infraction at the beginning of the Remarks field. This will assist the DCI in tracking penalties.

DCI Reporter 2.X is not capable of using Match Point penalties. Events not using DCI Reporter 3.0 or greater should issue a Game Loss penalty instead.

The new REL levels correspond as follows to the old system: Regular = REL 1 & 2, Competitive = REL 3, Professional =

REL 4& 5. Various DCI Programs are being evaluated as to which REL they will be run at in the future.

Organizers are no longer able to sanction events at REL 2 or 3 for the purpose of variable-K. Tournaments doing so will be treated as REL 1.

Please stop using DCI Reporter V2.X by January 1, 2008 Old Infraction Infraction Regular Competitive Professional Deck/Warband Error (DWE)

Deck Problem—Illegal Main Decklist DWE — Illegal Decklist Deck Problem—Illegal Main Deck (Legal Decklist)

DWE — Illegal Deck (Legal Decklist)

Game Game Deck Problem—Illegal Main Deck (No Decklist Used) DWE — Illegal Deck (No Decklists)

Game Caution N/A Deck Problem—Illegal Sideboard List DWE — Improper Registration of Limited Card Pool Procedural Error—Failure to Desideboard DWE — Failure to Desideboard Game*

Warning Procedural Error—Minor DWE — Lost Miniature Caution Procedural Error—Minor GPE — Incorrect Representation Caution Procedural Error—Major GPE— Illegal Game State Warning Procedural Error—Major GPE — Missed Trigger Warning Procedural Error—Major GPE — Game Rule Violation Warning Procedural Error—Major GPE — Failure to Maintain Game State Warning Game Play Error (GPE)

Tournament Error (TE)

Procedural Error—Tardiness TE — Tardiness Procedural Error—Playing the Wrong Opponent TE — Playing the Wrong Opponent Warning Slow Play—Playing Slowly TE — Slow Play Procedural Error—Severe TE — Insufficient Randomization Procedural Error—Major TE — Failure to Follow Official Announcements Procedural Error—Minor TE — Draft Procedure Violation Game*

Warning Warning Warning Game Warning Caution Warning Unsporting Conduct (USC)

Unsporting Conduct—Minor USC — Minor Warning Unsporting Conduct—Major USC — Major Game*

Unsporting Conduct—Severe USC — Randomly Determining a Winner Cheating—Bribery USC — Bribery Disqualification without Prize Disqualification without Prize Unsporting Conduct—Severe USC — Aggressive Behavior Disqualification without Prize Unsporting Conduct—Severe USC — Theft of Tournament Material Disqualification without Prize Cheating Cheating—Stalling Cheating — Stalling Disqualification without Prize Cheating—Fraud Cheating — Fraud Disqualification without Prize Cheating—Other Cheating — Outside Assistance Disqualification without Prize Cheating—Other Cheating — Manipulation of Game Materials Disqualification without Prize Card Drawing—Looking at Extra Cards Looking at Extra Cards Caution Card Drawing—Drawing Extra Cards Drawing Extra Cards Warning Game Card Drawing—Improper Drawing at Start of Game Improper Drawing at Start of Game Caution Warning Card Game-Specific Warning Card Drawing—Drawing Extra Cards Failure to Discard Caution Warning Marked Cards—Minor Marked Cards — No Pattern Caution Warning Marked Cards—Major Marked Cards — Pattern Warning Game Procedural Error—Minor Dice Error — Too Few Rolled Caution Procedural Error—Major Dice Error — Too Many Rolled Warning Miniatures Game-Specific Warning Warning Game Appendix D – Rule Enforcement Levels of premiere programs Unless otherwise noted a tournament's REL is Regular Brand Event REL D&D Minis Championship Competitive D&D Minis Qualifer Competitive D&D Minis Release Event Regular Dreamblade Dreamblade 10K Competitive Dreamblade Dreamblade 1K Regular Dreamblade Dreamblade 50K Championship Competitive Dreamblade Edge Regular Magic Amateur Championship Competitive Magic City Championship Finals Competitive Magic Friday Night Magic Regular Magic Gateway Regular Magic Grand Prix Day 1 Competitive Magic Grand Prix Day 2 Professional Magic Grand Prix Trial Regular Magic Legacy Championship Competitive Magic Magic Invitational Professional Magic Nationals (3day/$10K+)

Professional Magic Nationals (2day)

Competitive Magic Nationals (Open)

Competitive Magic Prerelease Regular Magic Pro Tour Professional Magic Pro Tour Qualifier Competitive Magic Regionals Competitive Magic Release Event Regular Magic Scholarship Series Regular Magic Scholarship Series Championship Competitive Magic State/Provincial Champs Regular Magic Vintage Championship Competitive Magic World Championships Professional Star Wars Minis Championship Competitive Star Wars Minis Qualifer Competitive Star Wars Minis Release Event Regular

